20 November 2002Cabinet today received a briefing on the work of a Task Team made up of Statistics South Africa (Stats SA), the Medical Research Council (MRC) and the Departments of Health, Home Affairs and Social Development on the causes of death in South Africa between 1997 and 2001. The research was commissioned by Cabinet to help identify challenges with regard to such issues as the impact of road accidents, violence, HIV/AIDS, TB and other causes of death. A media briefing on the findings of the investigation, their implications and further research requirements will be conducted by the Team tomorrow (Thursday, 21 November). Cabinet expressed its collective support for, and commitment to take part in, the "16 Days of No Violence against Women and Children". In this regard, it called on all South Africans and institutions to join hands both to raise awareness and to ensure united action against abuse of women and children. Government and the security services in particular have prioritised these crimes. But because such violence takes place mainly inside families and communities, this fight can only succeed if society acts as one. At the Cabinet meeting, the Deputy President and Ministers who had not yet done so, appended their signatures in a Special Commemorative Book of Pledges in support of the campaign; and government urges all South Africans to sign the pledge. The following appointments were approved: The meeting received and noted a Report of the National Conventional Arms Control Committee for the period 1 January to 30 June 2002. The meeting noted the consistent and principled manner in which the Committee has handled these matters, which has created better clarity and improved certainty among partner-countries in this area of our work. Cabinet noted a briefing on investigations into the high profile incidents of crime that have taken place in the past few weeks. It welcomed the progress that is being made in tracking down criminals responsible for the bomb explosions that took place recently in Soweto, Bronkhorstspruit and Cape Town. The meeting also welcomed the rapid response of South African Police Service in apprehending those responsible for attacks on tourists in Mpumalanga and for the few incidents of cash-in-transit heists. The meeting expressed its appreciation at the progress being made in ensuring that United Nations Weapons Inspectors are able to fulfil their mandate in Iraq. Government also wishes to emphasise that, since no formal invitation has been issued for a South African State Visit to Iraq, the issue of whether or not the President would visit that country does not arise. Enquiries Joel Netshitenzhe Cell: 082 900 0083 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top