12 June 2002The Cabinet meeting today was opened with the observation of a minute of silence in memory of Peter Mokaba who passed away last Sunday, and in recognition of the role he played in the struggle for freedom and as Deputy Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. Cabinet reiterated the Government s heartfelt condolences to Mokaba s family. The meeting received a briefing on preparations for the ICC Cricket World Cup to be held next year in South Africa. Cabinet congratulated the Organising Committee for the work done thus far, and committed itself to work with the Committee to make the event a success. Cabinet discussed the problem of the drought gripping parts of southern Africa, and it welcomed the efforts being made both in the region and internationally to provide relief. Great progress has been made particularly in the recent meeting of the SADC Disaster Response Task Force, to co-ordinate efforts across the sub-continent. It was agreed to strengthen structures in government so as to improve South Africa s participation in these efforts. The meeting also agreed that government should pay special attention to the challenge of relief aid to Angola. The meeting examined the programme for Youth Development Month, and committed Cabinet to take part in the various activities planned. This is aimed at promoting the participation of youth in building a better life, building a youth volunteer corps, and mobilising young people as agents for the renewal of Africa. Cabinet received a report on the continuing work to restructure State-owned Enterprises. In particular, the following decisions were taken: Cabinet received and welcomed the Business Plan of the South African Post Office (SAPO), which includes a turn-around strategy for the 2002/03 financial year. The strategy takes into account current performance of SAPO, market trends and shareholder expectations. It was also agreed urgently to finalise the process aimed at taking action against particular individuals implicated in acts of corruption and other wrongdoing within SAPO. The following Bills were approved for submission to Parliament: The meeting welcomed progress being made in the processing of the Minerals and Petroleum Development Bill, and recommitted government to the objectives of the Bill. The growing interest by foreign investors, small business in the mining industry, as well the plans for greater beneficiation within the country, augur well for job creation and are in line with the critical objectives of the Bill. Cabinet received a report on the work of the SA Geographic Names Committee. The principal and immediate challenges facing the Committee include setting out principles regarding the responsibilities of different spheres of government, which will be gazetted in the next few weeks. This will expedite the task of addressing a backlog of approximately 57 000 names requiring approval. The following appointments were approved: Enquiries Joel Netshitenzhe Cell: 082 900 0083 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top