15 May 2002Cabinet today opened its meeting with the lighting of candles to mark International Candlelight Memorial Day, in memory of those who have died of AIDS. Under the theme, "Share your vision for a brighter tomorrow", Cabinet was led in prayer by the Deputy President, and reiterated its commitment to the implementation of government s comprehensive strategy on HIV/AIDS. The meeting was informed that the Department of Communications and ICASA had resolved the matter of the offer for the Black Economic Empowerment component of the Second National Operator. A Notice explaining the legal provisions under which this matter is being processed will be issued by the Minister in the next few days. Cabinet was briefed on the recommendations that the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development had made relating to Presidential pardon granted to serving prisoners, as provided for in the Constitution. Government wishes to emphasise that these processes are undertaken on the basis of applications received by the Department, which in turn makes recommendations to the President taking into account issues such as the interests of the communities affected and of the public in general. It was emphasised that any prisoners in a similar position had the right to make such representations, which would be assessed on merit. The meeting received a report on preparations for the WSSD, including South Africa s approach to substantive matters that will serve before the Preparatory Committee meeting in Indonesia in a fortnight s time, as well as comprehensive security measures that are being put in place for the Johannesburg Summit. Cabinet approved these positions and welcomed the efforts by the various structures involved, to make the Summit a success. Cabinet examined preparations for Child Protection Week (25 May 1 June), which this year will be used to launch a campaign for the registration of children for the Child Support Grant. This campaign, which takes forward the announcement by the President in the State of the Nation Address that all eligible children should be registered by 2005, will involve civil society in the spirit of vuk uzenzele and volunteerism. The period will also mark the beginning of the disbursement of the R2bn allocated to pay pensioners the "back-grants" due to them as a result of last year s change in regulations. On behalf of government and the nation as a whole, Cabinet congratulated the players who have been selected to represent the nation at the Soccer World Cup. It wished the national soccer team, Bafana Bafana well in all their endeavours at the tournament. The following Bills and other statutes were approved: The meeting approved the appointment of Advocate F Malunga as Chief Executive Officer (CEO) for the Companies and Intellectual Property Registration Office (CIPRO) in the Department of Trade and Industry. Cabinet resolved to send its condolences to Deputy Minister Joe Matthews whose wife passed away a few days ago. Enquiries Joel Netshitenzhe Cell: 082 900 0083 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top